{\rtf1\ansi \deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Tms Rmn{\*\falt Times New Roman};}{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Helv;}{\f3\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier;}
{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial;}{\f6\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 MS Serif;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 MS Sans Serif;}{\f8\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times;}{\f9\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Helvetica;}
{\f10\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 System;}{\f11\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier New;}{\f12\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 New York;}{\f13\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Geneva;}{\f14\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 AvantGarde;}{\f15\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 ITC Bookman;}
{\f16\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Helvetica-Narrow;}{\f17\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 NewCenturySchlbk;}{\f18\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Palatino;}{\f19\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 ZapfChancery;}{\f20\fdecor\fcharset2\fprq2 ZapfDingbats;}{\f21\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Marlett;}
{\f22\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Lucida Console;}{\f23\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lucida Sans Unicode;}{\f24\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Wingdings;}{\f25\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Century Schoolbook;}{\f26\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial Narrow;}
{\f27\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Map Symbols;}{\f28\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Garamond;}{\f29\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Algerian;}{\f30\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Footlight MT Light;}{\f31\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Bookshelf Symbol 3;}
{\f32\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial Black;}{\f33\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Book Antiqua;}{\f34\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Colonna MT;}{\f35\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Monotype Sorts;}{\f36\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 MT Extra;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Bookman Old Style;}{\f38\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Playbill;}{\f39\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2 Brush Script MT;}{\f40\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Impact;}{\f41\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial Rounded MT Bold;}
{\f42\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Haettenschweiler;}{\f43\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Desdemona;}{\f44\fmodern\fcharset2\fprq1 MS LineDraw;}{\f45\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Bookshelf Symbol 1;}{\f46\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Wide Latin;}
{\f47\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Century Gothic;}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Britannic Bold;}{\f49\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Braggadocio;}{\f50\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2 Matura MT Script Capitals;}{\f51\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Bookshelf Symbol 2;}
{\f52\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Kino MT;}{\f53\fscript\fcharset0\fprq2 Comic Sans MS;}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Verdana;}{\f55\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Code39-Digits;}{\f56\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 OCR-B-Digits;}{\f57\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 ZipCodeBarcode;}
{\f58\froman\fcharset255\fprq2 Roman;}{\f59\fscript\fcharset255\fprq2 Script;}{\f60\fmodern\fcharset255\fprq2 Modern;}{\f61\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq1 MS Dialog;}{\f62\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times Roman;}{\f63\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2 Fences;}
{\f64\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Aardvark;}{\f65\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Adelaide;}{\f66\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Alefbet;}{\f67\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Algiers;}{\f68\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Alto;}{\f69\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Amherst;}
{\f70\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Amy;}{\f71\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ProseAntique;}{\f72\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arabia;}{\f73\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Architecture;}{\f74\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Avalon;}{\f75\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 BahamasHeavy;}
{\f76\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 BahamasLight;}{\f77\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bahamas;}{\f78\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 BallroomTango;}{\f79\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Banff;}{\f80\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bangkok;}{\f81\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bard;}
{\f82\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bassoon;}{\f83\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bedrock;}{\f84\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Beehive;}{\f85\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 BigTop;}{\f86\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bodnoff;}{\f87\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bosanova;}
{\f88\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 BravoEngraved;}{\f89\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Bravo;}{\f90\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Briquet;}{\f91\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Brisk;}{\f92\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Brochure;}{\f93\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Brooklyn;}
{\f94\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 NewBrunswick;}{\f95\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Busker;}{\f96\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Campaign;}{\f97\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Cancun;}{\f98\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Carino;}{\f99\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Carleton;}
{\f100\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 CasablancaAntique;}{\f101\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Casablanca;}{\f102\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 CasperOpenFace;}{\f103\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Castanet;}{\f104\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 DawnCastle;}
{\f105\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 CenturionOld;}{\f106\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Chalk;}{\f107\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Charlesworth;}{\f108\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 CommonBullets;}{\f109\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 CopperPot;}{\f110\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 CosmicTwo;}
{\f111\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Cosmic;}{\f112\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Cottage;}{\f113\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Crescent;}{\f114\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Cupertino;}{\f115\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Czar;}{\f116\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Dauphin;}
{\f117\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Dixieland;}{\f118\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Eklektic;}{\f119\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Envision;}{\f120\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ErieContour;}{\f121\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Erie;}{\f122\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ErieBlack;}
{\f123\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ErieLight;}{\f124\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Euromode;}{\f125\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Expo;}{\f126\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Florence;}{\f127\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 France;}{\f128\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FrankfurtGothicHeavy;}
{\f129\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FrankfurtGothic;}{\f130\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FrankHighlight;}{\f131\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Freeport;}{\f132\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Frankenstein;}{\f133\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Fujiyama2;}
{\f134\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Fujiyama;}{\f135\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FujiyamaBlack;}{\f136\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FujiyamaExtraBold;}{\f137\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 FujiyamaLight;}{\f138\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Galleria;}
{\f139\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Gatineau;}{\f140\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 GeographicSymbols;}{\f141\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 GilbertUltraBold;}{\f142\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Glacier;}{\f143\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 GoldenOldStyle;}
{\f144\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 GoldMine;}{\f145\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 GriffonShadow;}{\f146\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Griffon;}{\f147\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Harpoon;}{\f148\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Heidelberg;}{\f149\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Hollow;}
{\f150\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 HomewardBound;}{\f151\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Indiana;}{\f152\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 IndianaSolid;}{\f153\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Ireland;}{\f154\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Jupiter;}{\f155\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 KabanaBold;}
{\f156\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 KabanaBook;}{\f157\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Kastler;}{\f158\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Keypunch;}{\f159\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 Keystroke;}{\f160\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Kids;}{\f161\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Koala;}
{\f162\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Korinthia;}{\f163\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lincoln;}{\f164\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Linus;}{\f165\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 LiquidCrystal;}{\f166\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lithograph;}{\f167\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 LithographLight;}
{\f168\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Memorandum;}{\f169\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Merlin;}{\f170\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Monospaced;}{\f171\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Motor;}{\f172\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 MusicalSymbols;}{\f173\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Mystical;}
{\f174\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Nebraska;}{\f175\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 NewOrder;}{\f176\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 NewOrderEngraved;}{\f177\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Nuance;}{\f178\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Newfoundland;}{\f179\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Ottawa;}
{\f180\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Palette;}{\f181\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 PalmSprings;}{\f182\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Paradise;}{\f183\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Paragon;}{\f184\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 PenguinLight;}{\f185\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Penguin;}
{\f186\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Pepper;}{\f187\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Pipeline;}{\f188\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Playwright;}{\f189\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Posse;}{\f190\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 PowerLine;}{\f191\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 President;}
{\f192\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Quantum;}{\f193\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Renfrew;}{\f194\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Scott;}{\f195\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Scribe;}{\f196\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Shogun;}{\f197\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Southern;}
{\f198\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Stamp;}{\f199\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Surreal;}{\f200\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Switzerland;}{\f201\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandBlack;}{\f202\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandCondBlack;}
{\f203\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandCondensed;}{\f204\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandCondLight;}{\f205\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandInserat;}{\f206\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandLight;}{\f207\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 SwitzerlandNarrow;}
{\f208\fswiss\fcharset2\fprq2 GreekMathSymbols;}{\f209\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Technical;}{\f210\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ThunderBay;}{\f211\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 Timpani;}{\f212\fnil\fcharset0\fprq2 TimpaniHeavy;}{\f213\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Toronto;}
{\f214\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Trafalgar;}{\f215\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Umbrella;}{\f216\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Unicorn;}{\f217\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Uptown;}{\f218\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 USABlack;}{\f219\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 USALight;}
{\f220\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Viking;}{\f221\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Vivienne;}{\f222\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Vogue;}{\f223\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 ZurichCalligraphic;}{\f224\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Bookman{\*\falt Bookman Old Style};}
{\f225\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq0 pica;}{\f226\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Helvetica-Condensed;}{\f227\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Fixedsys;}{\f228\fmodern\fcharset255\fprq1 8514oem;}{\f229\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Small Fonts;}{\f230\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 DECVT;}
{\f231\fmodern\fcharset255\fprq1 IBMPC;}{\f232\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 XT Term;}{\f233\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Wyse Term Primary;}{\f234\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Wyse Term Multinational;}{\f235\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Wyse Term PC;}
{\f236\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lucida Sans B;}{\f237\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lucida Sans B1;}{\f238\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Lucida Sans B2;}{\f239\fdecor\fcharset0\fprq2 Symbol B;}{\f240\fmodern\fcharset255\fprq1 Terminal;}
{\f241\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 MS Dialog Light;}{\f242\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 MS SystemEx;}{\f243\froman\fcharset0\fprq0 (normal text);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}
{\stylesheet{\nowidctlpar \fs20 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\nowidctlpar \b\f2\ul \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\sb120\nowidctlpar \b\f2 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}{\s3\li360\nowidctlpar \b \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 3;}{\s4\li360\nowidctlpar \ul 
\sbasedon0\snext17 heading 4;}{\s5\li720\nowidctlpar \b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 5;}{\s6\li720\nowidctlpar \fs20\ul \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 6;}{\s7\li720\nowidctlpar \i\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 7;}{\s8\li720\nowidctlpar \i\fs20 
\sbasedon0\snext17 heading 8;}{\s9\li720\nowidctlpar \i\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext17 heading 9;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive\fs16\up6 \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}{\s16\nowidctlpar \fs20 \sbasedon0\snext16 footnote text;}{
\s17\li720\nowidctlpar \fs20 \sbasedon0\snext17 Normal Indent;}{\s18\fi-240\li480\sb80\nowidctlpar\tx480 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext18 nscba;}{\s19\fi-240\li240\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext19 j;}{\s20\li480\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext20 ij;}{
\s21\sb80\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext21 btb;}{\s22\fi-240\li2400\sb20\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 ctcb;}{\s23\fi-240\li480\sa40\nowidctlpar\tx480 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext23 ns;}{\s24\sa120\nowidctlpar \f9\fs28 \sbasedon0\snext24 
TT;}{\s25\fi-240\li2400\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext25 crtj;}{\s26\fi-240\li480\nowidctlpar\tx480 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext26 nsca;}{\s27\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext27 bt;}{\s28\li240\sb120\sa40\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext28 Hf;}{
\s29\li240\sb120\sa40\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext29 Hs;}{\s30\li480\sb120\sa40\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext30 RT;}{\s31\fi-2160\li2160\sb240\sa80\nowidctlpar\tx2160 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext31 c;}{\s32\li2160\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext32 
ct;}{\s33\li240\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext33 it;}{\s34\li480\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 nsct;}{\s35\fi-160\li400\sb80\sa40\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext35 nscb;}{\s36\fi-2640\li2880\sb120\sa40\nowidctlpar\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw15 
\brdrbtw\brdrs\brdrw15 \tx2880 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext36 HC2;}{\s37\fi-2640\li2880\sb120\sa20\nowidctlpar\tx2880 \f9 \sbasedon0\snext37 C2;}{\s38\fi-240\li2400\sa20\nowidctlpar \f9\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext38 ctc;}{\s39\li2160\sb160\nowidctlpar \f9 
\sbasedon0\snext39 crt;}{\s40\li480\sb20\sa40\nowidctlpar \f9 \sbasedon0\snext40 or;}{\*\cs41 \additive\super \sbasedon10 endnote reference;}}{\info{\author Ian Ashdown}{\operator Ian Ashdown}{\creatim\yr2137\mo8\dy7}{\revtim\yr1997\mo3\dy28\hr17\min40}
{\printim\yr1994\mo12\dy15\hr10\min17}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages31}{\nofwords6270}{\nofchars35744}{\*\company Dell Computer Corporation}{\vern57443}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd \linex576\endnhere {\*\pnseclvl1
\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc\sb120\nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\b\scaps\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} main_index}${\footnote \pard\plain 
\nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Help Index}+{\footnote \pard\plain \s16\nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} index:0005}}{\b\scaps\f9\fs32 Welcome to the}{\b\scaps\f37\fs32 
\par }\pard \qc\nowidctlpar {\b\i\f37\fs56\cf6 HELIOS}{\b\i\f37\fs48\cf6 
\par }\pard \qc\sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\scaps\f9\fs32 Radiosity Renderer\'99}{\b\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Introduction
\par }\pard \qj\li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Radiosity }{\f9 is an advanced computer graphics technique that you can use to synthesize photorealistic images without ray tracing. }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 
 brings this new and exciting technology to your personal desktop computer.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9\uldb What is Radiosity?}{\v\f9 HELP_WHAT_IS_RADIOSITY}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb Using HELIOS}{\v\f9 HELP_USING_HELIOS}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb HELIOS File Formats}{\v\f9 HELP_FILE_FORMATS}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb Read This Book!}{\v\f9 HELP_BOOK}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb What's New?}{\v\f9 HELP_WHATS_NEW}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb Commercial License}{\v\f9 HELP_LICENSE}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9\uldb Credits}{\v\f9 HELP_CREDITS}{\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Commands}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9\uldb File Menu}{\v\f9 HELP_FILE_MENU}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb Camera Menu}{\v\f9 HELP_CAMERA_MENU}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\uldb Render Menu}{\v\f9 HELP_RENDER_MENU}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9\uldb Options Menu}{\v\f9 HELP_OPTIONS_MENU}{\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Glossary}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9\uldb Defined Terms}{\v\f9 glossary}{\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_WHAT_IS_RADIOSITY}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} What is Radiosity?}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote 
\pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 What is Radiosity?
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 
There are two approaches to generating photorealistic images -- digital pictures that are difficult to distinguish from real photographs -- in computer graphics. The first approach involves ray-tracing techniques; the second approach is }{\i\f9 radiosity}
{\f9 .
\par Radiosity is in a sense the complement of ray tracing. Ray-tracing techniques excel in the rendition of point light sources, specular reflections, and refraction effects. Radiosity methods accurately model area light sources, diffuse reflections, color bl
eeding effects, and realistic shadows. Whether you choose ray tracing or radiosity will depend in part on what effects you consider to be more important in your images.
\par Radiosity has the advantage of view independence. Using ray-tracing techniques, the numb
er of ray-surface intersection calculations can increase geometrically with the complexity of the scene. Change your point of view and you typically have to start from scratch to generate a new image. With radiosity, however, you only need to perform the 
lighting calculations once for a given environment. Once they have been completed, you can quickly render a view of the environment as seen from any position and orientation.
\par Folklore has it that you need a high-powered graphics workstation or even a superc
omputer to experiment with radiosity rendering techniques. Not so! All you need is an IBM PC-AT clone with an 80386 CPU and a math coprocessor, 4 megabytes of RAM, and a 256-color video display adapter.
\par Of course, a faster machine is always better. Using an off-the-shelf desktop computer equipped with a 66 MHz 80486 CPU, you can create photorealistic images in ... are you ready for this? ... less than a minute. (With a 200 MHz Pentium Pro running Windows
 95 or Windows NT, this becomes less than 15 }{\i\f9 seconds}{\f9 .) Compared to the hours typically needed to ray trace photorealistic images, there is something to be said for radiosity techniques.
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 
 was written to demonstrate the power of radiosity-based rendering. It is a fully functional program for Microsoft Windows, and was designed for those interested in experimenting with advanced computer graphics techniques.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9\fs24 Radiosity Explained
\par }{\f9 So, what is radiosity? Well, imagine a room that has a chair sitting on the floor, a picture hanging on the wall, a floating apple, and two light fixtures suspended from the ceiling. In addition, imagine that each surface is divided into a mesh of }
{\f9\ul elements}{\v\f9 term_element}{\f9 .
\par To determine exactly how the room is illuminated, we begin with the light fixtures. They are emitting light, and so we find those surface elements in the room that are visible to them and calculate how much of the light is transferred to each element. (Th
is is easier said than done, but we can ignore the mathematical details here.)
\par Some elements will receive more light t
han others, and different surfaces will reflect different amount of light. Still, it is clear that each element will absorb some of the light, and so that the total amount of light reflected back into the room will be less than that emitted by the light f
ixtures.
\par This is the first }{\f9\ul step}{\v\f9 term_step}{\f9  of our }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
. We now find the element that is reflecting the most amount of light and repeat the process. In other words, we consider the element to be a secondary light so
urce and calculate how much of its reflected light is transferred to those other elements in the room that are visible to it.
\par We can repeat this process, one step at a time, until the amount of light remaining in the room is vanishingly small in comparison to the light originally emitted by the light fixture. We then say that our radiosity calculations have }{\f9\ul converged}{
\v\f9 term_convergence}{\f9  to a solution. By adding up all the light that has been reflected from each surface element, we can calculate the }{\f9\ul luminance}{\v\f9 term_luminance}{\f9  (or, colloquially speaking, the }{\i\f9 brightness}{\f9 
) of each one.
\par We know the geometry of each element in the room -- in computer graphics parlance, it is a three-dimensional polygon. If we know its luminance, we can use a three-dimensional graphics package to directly render a photorealistic image of the room from any 
viewpoint.
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 That's all there is to it! Radiosity explained in 500 words or less. To stop imagining and start doing, see }{\strike\f9 Using HELIOS}{\v\f9 HELP_USING_HELIOS}{\f9 . The room described above can be found in ROOM.WLD.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9\fs24 Learning More About Radiosity
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 There is of course much more that can be said about radiosity. Try }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  and see what you think of it. If you want to learn more, take a look at }{\strike\f9 Read This Book!}{\v\f9 HELP_BOOK}{\f9 \page }{
\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_USING_HELIOS}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Using HELIOS}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +}
 commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 Using HELIOS
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 This release of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  is a Windows 95 / NT demonstration program that includes one sample }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9 
. This environment consists of a room with a chair on the floor, a floating apple and an oblate sphere, a picture on the wall, and two fluorescent lighting fixtures that illuminate the room.
\par While this room may not be the most exciting of environments, it clearly demonstrates radiosity's ability to model area light sources, diffuse reflections, color bleeding effects and realistic shadows.
\par The associated environment and }{\f9\ul entity}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9  files are:
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 ROOM.WLD
\par APPLE.ENT
\par CEILING.ENT
\par CHAIR.ENT
\par FLOOR.ENT
\par LIGHT_1.ENT
\par LIGHT_2.ENT
\par PICTURE.ENT
\par SPHERE.ENT
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 WALL.ENT
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 All of these files should be stored in the same directory.
\par To display a view of the room, we can:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 File}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Open}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Open}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Select the ROOM.WLD file.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 An }{\i\f9 Environment Statistics}{\f9  dialog box will appear with an enumeration of the instances, surfaces, patches, elements and vertices in the environment. Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par If the entity files are not in the same directory as ROOM.WLD, an error message will appear in a dialog box. Rather than exiting }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 , we can:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 File}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Entities}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Entities Directory}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Enter the correct file path in the }{\i\f9 Entities File Path}{\f9  edit control and repeat the previous three steps to select the ROOM.WLD file again.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 When the environment file is successfully opened, }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  will automatically display a wireframe image of the room from a default viewpoint. This image will automatically resize itself whenever the }{\b\f9 
HELIOS}{\f9  display window size is changed.
\par You can change this default viewpoint by clicking on the right mouse button to display the interactive mode menu. There are six modes to choose from: }{\i\f9 Dolly}{\f9 , }{\i\f9 Orbit}{\f9 , }{\i\f9 Pan}{\f9 , }{\i\f9 Rotate}{\f9 , }{\i\f9 Tilt}{\f9 
, and }{\i\f9 Zoom}{\f9 . Only one of these modes can be activated at a time. The mouse is enabled whenever a mode is active and the left mouse button is depressed. The wireframe or bitmap image will be redrawn when the mouse button is released.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 These modes behave as follows:
\par 1.\tab }{\b\f9 Dolly}{\f9  - the camera eye position and focus position are shifted forward or backward along the camera's line of sight (i.e., the }{\f9\ul view direction}{\v\f9 term_view_direction}{\f9 
 vector). Moving the mouse upwards on the screen moves the eye and focus positions forward; moving the mouse downwards moves them backward.
\par 2.\tab }{\b\f9 Orbit}{\f9  - the camera eye position is rotated about the focus position, with the camera's line of sight remai
ning fixed on the focus position. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen moves the eye position in the same direction.
\par 3.\tab }{\b\f9 Pan}{\f9 
 - the camera eye position and focus position are shifted horizontally and vertically perpendicular to the camera's line of sight. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen moves the eye and focus positions in the same direction.
\par 4.\tab }{\b\f9 Rotate}{\f9  - the camera's view direction and focus position are rotated horizontally and vertically about the eye position. Moving the 
mouse in a given direction on the screen rotates the view direction vector and moves the focus position in the same direction.
\par 5.\tab }{\b\f9 Tilt}{\f9  - the camera's }{\f9\ul view-up vector}{\v\f9 term_viewup_vector}{\f9 
 (and hence the viewed image) is tilted relative to its default vertical orientation. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen tilts the view-up vector in the same direction.
\par 6.\tab }{\b\f9 Zoom}{\f9  - the camera's }{\f9\ul view distance}{\v\f9 term_view_distance}{\f9  is decreased or increased, resulting in a larger or smaller }{\f9\ul field of view}{\v\f9 term_field_of_view}{\f9 
. Moving the mouse upwards on the screen decreases the view distance; moving the mouse downwards increases the view distance. (This is equivalent to adjusting the focal length of a zoom lens on a camera.)
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 If you get lost at any time and cannot see the room, you can return to the default view by:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Camera}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Default View }{\f9  menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Camera Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Enter 2 in the }{\i\f9 View Distance}{\f9  edit control.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 You can also set the camera's view distance (field of view) and tilt angle with the help of the }{\i\f9 Camera Parameters }{\f9 dialog box. For example:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Camera}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Set Camera }{\f9  menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Camera Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Enter 2 in the }{\i\f9 View Distance}{\f9  edit control.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 This sets the camera }{\f9\ul view distance}{\v\f9 term_view_distance}{\f9  at 2.0 units, giving a field of view roughly equivalent to a 35-mm lens on a 35-mm camera. The default }{\i\f9 Window Dimensions}{\f9  values tells 
}{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  to display the image as a horizontally oriented bitmap of 640 x 480 pixels. We can change this to whatever we want, from a minimum of 32 to a maximum of 1,024 pixels.
\par The }{\f9\ul synthetic camera}{\v\f9 term_synthetic_camera}{\f9 's eye and focus positions can be similarly set with the help of the View Parameters dialog box. For example:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Camera}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Set View...}{\f9  menu item to display the }{\i\f9 View Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Enter 2.6 in the }{\i\f9 Eye Position X-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par 4.\tab Enter 1.4 in the }{\i\f9 Eye Position Y-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par 5.\tab Enter 1.3 in the }{\i\f9 Eye Position Z-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par 6.\tab Enter 0.5 in the }{\i\f9 Focus Position X-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par 7.\tab Enter 0.8 in the }{\i\f9 Focus Position Y-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par 8.\tab Enter 0.5 in the }{\i\f9 Focus Position Z-Axis}{\f9  edit control.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 9.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 We can go back and change any of the previous entries to change the camera parameters; the wireframe image will update itself accordingly. (Selecting the }{\i\f9 Update}{\f9  button in the }{\i\f9 Camera Parameters}{\f9  or 
}{\i\f9 View Parameters}{\f9  dialog box will update the wireframe image without closing the dialog box. The eye position, focus position, view distance, and camera tilt fields will also be updated whenever you use the mouse to change the view.)
\par To display a full-color shaded (but not photorealistic) bitmap image, we can:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Render}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Shaded}{\f9  menu item.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 A dialog box titled }{\i\f9 Rendering Calculations}{\f9  with the message "Polygon shading in progress..." will appear. If the computer is capable of
 displaying only 256 colors, it will be followed by message "Color quantization in progress...\rdblquote  to indicate that }{\f9\ul color quantization}{\v\f9 term_color_quantization}{\f9  is being performed.
\par It will take a few seconds or more before the image is displayed, depending on the CPU speed. Increasing the bitmap size in either direction increases the display calculation time accordingly. The surface colors are those specified in the entity files, wi
thout any lighting taken into account.
\par To generate a photorealistic bitmap image, we must:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Render}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Rendering}{\f9  menu item.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 A dialog box titled }{\i\f9 Radiosity Calculations}{\f9  will appear to indicate the current and maximum number of }{\f9\ul steps}{\v\f9 term_step}{\f9 , the current and minimum }{\f9\ul convergence}{\v\f9 term_convergence}{
\f9 , and the elapsed time. You can press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 Stop}{\f9  button at any time to stop the }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
. The default number of steps is 100, which will require approximately 68 seconds to complete on a 66 MHz 80486 CPU machine.
\par The }{\i\f9 Rendering Calculations}{\f9  dialog box as described above will appear when the radiosity calculations are completed. This will be followed by a }{\i\f9 Convergence Statistics}{\f9 
 dialog box that displays the number of steps, convergence and elapsed time for the radiosity and rendering calculations.
\par The photorealistic image will appear behind the }{\i\f9 Convergence Statistics}{\f9  dialog box. Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button to close the dialog box. (If the computer is only capable of displaying 256 colors, the colors may
 appear to be incorrect. However, they will be displayed correctly once the dialog box is closed.)
\par Having performed the }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9  for the environment, we do not need to choose }{\i\f9 Rendering}{\f9 
 again until we open a new environment file. That is, we can change the camera parameters to look at the environment from whatever direction we choose, using the }{\i\f9 Wireframe}{\f9 
 display to provide a quick preview. Once we have what we want, we can:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Render}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Redisplay}{\f9  menu item.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 to redisplay a photorealistic image of the room.
\par We can redisplay the image in gray scale or pseudocolor by:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Options}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Set Display}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Display Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Select either the }{\i\f9 Grayscale}{\f9  or }{\i\f9 Pseudocolor}{\f9  radio button from the }{\i\f9 Color Display}{\f9  group.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 (You can also select the }{\i\f9 Update}{\f9  button if you do not want the dialog box to close after the image has been redisplayed.)
\par If the computer cannot display 16.7 million (24-bit) colors, there may be some noticeable color banding in the bitmap image. To alleviate this problem, try:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose }{\i\f9 Options}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.,\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Set Display}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Display Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Check the }{\i\f9 Enabled}{\f9  check box in the }{\i\f9 Color Reduction}{\f9  group.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 By default, the }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
 terminate after 100 steps. However, the Convergence Statistics dialog box indicates that there is still some 15 percent of the light emitted by the light fixture that has not been absorbed (as shown by the convergence value). A more accurate photorealist
ic image can be obtained by allowing the radiosity calculations to run until there is only 1/10 percent of the light remaining. To do this, we can:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose}{\i\f9  Options}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Set Convergence}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Convergence Parameters}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Enter 1000 in the }{\i\f9 Maximum Steps}{\f9  edit control.
\par 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par 5.\tab Choose Render from the menu bar.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 6.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Rendering}{\f9 ... menu item.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 The difference between the images are subtle but important. Look in particular at the shadows and the diffuse color bleeding (i.e., reflections) between the boxes and the adjacent walls.
\par Finally, we can save the bitmap image to a Microsoft Paintbrush-compatible BMP graphics file by:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab Choose}{\i\f9  File}{\f9  from the menu bar.
\par 2.\tab Choose the }{\i\f9 Save As}{\f9 ... menu item to display the }{\i\f9 Save As}{\f9  dialog box.
\par 3.\tab Specify an appropriate directory and file name for the file.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 4.\tab Press <Enter> or select the }{\i\f9 OK}{\f9  button.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 This completes our guided tour of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 . There are some dialog box features that we have not examined, but the on-line help explains what they are for and how to use them.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_FILE_FORMATS}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} HELIOS File Formats}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 HELIOS File Formats}{\b\f9 
\par }{\b\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 First, a word of warning: the data file formats used by }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  are extremely rudimentary. They were not designed for compatibility with any existing graphics standard or CAD program.
\par Using these file formats requires: (a) a text editor; and (b) }{\i\f9 lots}{\f9 
 of patience. When you have to include the source code for an entire data file parser in a book devoted to radiosity rendering, your options are limited ... these file formats were }{\i\f9 not}{\f9  designed for ease of use.
\par There are two data file formats: one to describe individual }{\f9\ul entities}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9  and another to describe the transformations necessary to create }{\f9\ul instances}{\v\f9 term_instance}{\f9  of them in an }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 
term_environment}{\f9 . The descriptions of these file formats are complete but necessarily abbreviated. Full details are provided in the book, }{\b\i\f9 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective}{\f9  (Wiley, 1994).
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 Another word of warning: the file parser employed by }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  does very little error checking. If you open an invalid environment (*.WLD) or entity (*.ENT) file, }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 
 may crash rather than issue a diagnostic error message.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Entity File (*.ENT) Format Specification
\par }{\f9 Each }{\f9\ul entity}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9  is composed of a set of planar surfaces, with each surface having a specified reflectance (defined as an RGB color) and a specified }{\f9\ul emittance}{\v\f9 term_emittance}{\f9 
 (also defined as an RGB color. Only light sources have non-zero emittance values.
\par Each surface is subdivided into an array (mesh) of one or more triangular and/or quadrilateral }{\f9\ul patches}{\v\f9 term_patch}{\f9 . Each patch is further subdivided into an array (mesh) of one or more }{\f9\ul elements}{\v\f9 term_element}{\f9 .

\par The elements and patches are defined by their vertices. Because most vertices will be shared by two or more elements, they are specified separately. The elements and patches then specify their vertices by an array of indices into this array.
\par The reason for the hierarchy of surfaces, patches, and elements is simple. Imagine a light source that is illuminating a surface. At each }{\f9\ul step}{\v\f9 term_step}{\f9  of our }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
, the light reflected and/or emitted by one element is transferred to all the other elements in the environme
nt that are visible to it. However, in many cases, the amount of light transferred to a group of adjacent elements will be the same (proportional to their area). It makes sense, therefore, to transfer the light from an element to a patch, and then allocat
e that light among the elements of the patch in accordance with their relative areas. This is much faster than transferring the light to each individual element within the patch.
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 Manually dividing surfaces into patches and elements is something of an art. If the elements or patches are too small and numerous, the radiosity calculations will take too long to }{\f9\ul converge}{\v\f9 term_convergence}{
\f9 
. If, on the other hand, the elements or patches are too large, the image will lack well-defined shadows. This is evident in the room image, where the shadows surrounding the objects do not appear fully realistic. In practice, the floor surface should be 
more finely divided into patches and elements, particularly where there are shadow edges. Unfortunately, it is difficult to know where the shadow edges will occur until you render an image of the environment. (A future release of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 
 will overcome this problem by automatically dividing surfaces into a hierarchy of patches and elements.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f3 COMMENT Entity Data File
\par ENTITY entity_name
\par VERTEX
\par < x1 y1 z1 >
\par < x2 y2 z2 >
\par ...
\par < xm ym zm >
\par END_VERT
\par SURFACE
\par [ rr1 rg1 rb1 ] [ er1 eg1 eb1 ]
\par [ rr2 rg2 rb2 ] [ er2 eg2 eb2 ]
\par ...
\par [ rrn rgn rbn ] [ ern egn ebn ]
\par END_SURF
\par PATCH
\par s1 \{ v10 v11 v12 v13 \}
\par s2 \{ v20 v21 v22 v23 \}
\par ...
\par sp \{ vp0 vp1 vp2 vp3 \}
\par END_PATCH
\par ELEMENT
\par p1 \{ v10 v11 v12 v13 \}
\par p2 \{ v20 v21 v22 v23 \}
\par ...
\par pp \{ vp0 vp1 vp2 vp3 \}
\par END_ELEM
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f3 END_ENTITY
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 The syntactic rules for the entity file format specification are:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab The data file consists of ASCII characters.
\par 2.\tab Each line must be terminated with an environment-specific "newline" character (typically <CR><LF> for MS-DOS and <CR> for UNIX systems).
\par 3.\tab The maximum length of a line is 256 characters, including the newline character(s).
\par 4.\tab Multiple whitespace (ASCII space and horizontal tab) characters between data values and separators are ignored.
\par 5.\tab Comment lines beginning with the keyword "COMMENT" are ignored.
\par 6.\tab The data file consists of one ENTITY section.
\par 7.\tab The ENTITY section header begins with the "ENTITY" keyword, followed on the same line by an optional entity_name character string that identifies the entity. Any printable ASCII character is permitted in the string.
\par 8.\tab The ENTITY section header is followed by a VERTEX subsection. It begins with the "VERTEX" keyword, followed on subsequen
t lines by a list of four or more vertex vectors. A maximum of 65,536 vertex vectors are allowed. Each vertex is implicitly assigned an index number according to its position in the list, beginning with zero. The "END_VERT" keyword terminates the subsecti
on.
\par 9.\tab Each vertex vector consists of a '<' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the x, y and z values of the vertex co-ordinates respectively, followed by a '>' separator.
\par 10.\tab The VERTEX subsection is followed by a SURFACE subse
ction. It begins with the "SURFACE" keyword, followed on subsequent lines by a list of one or more RGB color vector pairs. The first vector of each pair represents the surface reflectance for the entity; the second vector represents the surface's initial 
surface spectral radiant exitance. A maximum of 65,536 surfaces are allowed. Each surface and its associated reflectance and initial exitance vectors are implicitly assigned an index number according to its position in the list, beginning with zero. The "
END_SURF" keyword terminates the subsection.
\par 11.\tab Each reflectance vector consists of a '[' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the red, green and blue primary color values respectively, followed by a ']' separator. The color values must be in the range 0.0 to 1.0.

\par 12.\tab Each initial exitance vector consists of a '[' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the red, green and blue primary color values respectively, followed by a ']' separator. The color values
 must be equal to or greater than 0.0.
\par 13.\tab 
The SURFACE subsection is followed by a PATCH subsection. It begins with the keyword "PATCH", followed on subsequent lines by one or more patch identifiers. A maximum of 65,536 polygon identifiers are allowed. The "END_PATCH" keyword terminates the su
bsection.
\par 14.\tab Each patch identifier consists of an integer number indicating the index number of the surface to which the patch belongs, followed by a '\{' separator, followed by four integer numbers indicating the indi
ces of the four patch vertices v0, v1, v2 and v3 respectively, followed by a '\}' separator. If the patch is a triangle, the third and fourth vertex indices must be identical.
\par 15.\tab 
The PATCH subsection is followed by an ELEMENT subsection. It begins with the keyword "ELEMENT", followed on subsequent lines by one or more element identifiers. A minimum of 65,536 element identifiers are allowed. The "END_ELEM" keyword terminates th
e subsection.
\par 16.\tab Each element identifier consists of an integer number indicating the index number of the patch to which the element belongs, followed by a '\{
' separator, followed by four integer numbers indicating the indices of the four element vertices v0, v1, v2 and v3 respectively, followed by a '\}' separator. If the element is a triangle, the third and fourth vertex indices must be identical.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 17.\tab The ELEMENT subsection is followed by an "END_ENTITY" keyword, which terminates the file.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 To clarify the above, here's an example of a small entity data file that describes a colored cube:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f3 ENTITY colored cube
\par VERTEX
\par < 0.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 0.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par < 1.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par < 0.0 1.0 1.0 >
\par END_VERT
\par SURFACE
\par [ 0.0 0.0 1.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par [ 1.0 1.0 0.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par [ 1.0 1.0 1.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par [ 0.0 1.0 1.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par [ 1.0 0.0 0.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par [ 0.0 1.0 0.0 ] [ 0.0 0.0 0.0 ]
\par END_SURF
\par PATCH
\par 0 \{  0  1  2  3 \}
\par 1 \{  4  5  6  7 \}
\par 2 \{  8  9 10 11 \}
\par 3 \{ 12 13 14 15 \}
\par 4 \{ 16 17 18 19 \}
\par 5 \{ 20 21 22 23 \}
\par END_PATCH
\par ELEMENT
\par 0 \{  0  1  2  3 \}
\par 1 \{  4  5  6  7 \}
\par 2 \{  8  9 10 11 \}
\par 3 \{ 12 13 14 15 \}
\par 4 \{ 16 17 18 19 \}
\par 5 \{ 20 21 22 23 \}
\par END_ELEM
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f3 END_ENTITY
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 For the sake of simplicity, the surfaces described here consist of one patch each. Similarly, each patch consists o
nly one element. Clearly though, any surface or patch can be subdivided into multiple patches and elements by defining additional vertices and patch or element identifiers.
\par 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Environment File (*.WLD) Format Specification
\par }{\f9 Building an environment consists of copying and transforming entities into instances. For this, we need an environment data file format to describe which entities are to be copied and what 3-D linear transformations are to be applied to them.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f3 WORLD world_name
\par COMMENT Environment Data File
\par entity_file_name
\par < sx sy sz >
\par < rx ry rz >
\par < tx ty tz >
\par entity_file_name
\par ...
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f3 END_FILE
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Similar to our entity data file format, the following syntax rules apply: 
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab The data file consists of ASCII characters.
\par 2.\tab Each line must be terminated with an environment-specific "newline" character (typically <CR><LF> for MS-DOS and <CR> for UNIX systems).
\par 3.\tab The maximum length of a line is 256 characters, including the newline character(s).
\par 4.\tab Multiple whitespace (ASCII space and horizontal tab) characters between data values and separators are ignored.
\par 5.\tab Comment lines beginning with the keyword "COMMENT" are ignored.
\par 6.\tab The data file begins with the keyword "WORLD", followed on the same line by an optional world_name character string that identifies the environment. Any printable ASCII character is permitted in the string.
\par 7.\tab The remainder of the data file consists of one or more entity sections, followed by the "END_FILE" keyword. Any lines after this keyword are ignored.
\par 8.\tab An entity section consists of an entity_file_name character string, followed in sequence by a scaling vector, a rotation vector and a translation vector.
\par 9.\tab The entity_file_name is an environment-specific file name that uniquely identifies the entity data file.
\par 10.\tab A scaling vector consists of a '<' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the x-axis, y-axis and z-axis scaling factors respectively, followed by a '>' separator.
\par 11.\tab A rotation vector consists of a '<' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the x-axis, y-axis and z-axis rotation angles (in degrees) respectively, followed by a '>' separator.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 12.\tab A translation vector consists of a '<' separator, followed by three floating point numbers representing the x-axis, y-axis and z-axis translation values respectively, followed by a '>' separator.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Here's an example of a data file that places two instances of our previously defined colored cube entity in a world environment:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f3 WORLD colored cube
\par COMMENT first instance
\par col_cube.ent
\par < 2.0 3.0 1.0 >
\par < 30.0 45.0 0.0 >
\par < 2.0 0.0 0.0 >
\par COMMENT second instance
\par col_cube.ent
\par < 1.5 1.0 0.5 >
\par < 30.0 45.0 30.0 >
\par < 0.0 0.0 1.0 >
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f3 END_FILE
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Again, these data file formats are only provided for those masochistic enough to write their own entity and environment files using a text editor and lots of patience!
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_BOOK}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Read This Book!}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 Read This Book!}{\b\f9 
\par }{\b\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 If this program intrigues you, then you may be interested in:
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\i\fs32\cf6 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective
\par }\pard \li2160\sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 by Ian Ashdown
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Paperback, 498 pages with 12 color plates, 1994
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 ISBN 0-471-30444-1 (without diskette), $39.95 US
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 ISBN 0-471-30488-3 (with 3.5-inch MS-DOS diskette), $54.95 US
\par }{\b\i\f9 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective}{\f9  offers step-by-step guidance for the development of a fully functional, radiosity-based rendering program for Microsoft Windows and other graphical environments, including:
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 =>\tab A detailed explanation of radiosity theory and its associated algorithms (no knowledge of higher mathematics required!)
\par =>\tab Complete, fully documented, and compiler-independent C++ source code (7,500+ lines) for }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 *, a radiosity renderer for Microsoft Windows 3.1, Windows 95, and Windows NT.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 =>\tab An extensive guide to the computer graphics radiosity literature.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 *\tab }{\f9 The version of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\i\f9  }{\f9 
presented in the book (Version 1.00A) employs a simplified MS-Windows user interface due to lack of space for the source code. All of the radiosity-related code, however, is identical to that included with this release of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 The accompanying diskette includes C++ source code and MS-Windows 3.1 executable files for }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 
. It also contains several sample environment files, a color quantization utility for MS-Windows Paintbrush-compatible BMP files, and a sample AutoCAD DXF file parser.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 Make files are included for the Microsoft Visual C++ Version 1.5 and Borland C++ Version 4.5 compilers. Most of the 7,500+ lines of C++ source code are compiler-independent, and can be easily ported to other graphical environmen
ts.
\par \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_WHATS_NEW}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} What's New?}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +}
 commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 What's New?
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Version 1.00A
\par }{\f9 The development of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  is an ongoing project. This version was written specifically for the book, }{\b\i\f9 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective}{\f9  (Wiley, 1994).
\par }{\b\f9 Version 1.02A
\par }{\f9 This version was released as a demonstration program to illustrate what radiosity-based rendering techniques have to offer for photorealistic image synthesis. New features included:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 *  integral color quantization
\par *  TARGA graphics file support
\par *  image intensity and contrast controls
\par *  parallel projection
\par *  MS-Windows 3.1 multitasking support
\par *  revised user interface
\par *  radiosity calculations progress display
\par *  MS-Windows on-line help
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 *  automatic detection of display device capabilities
\par }{\b\f9 Version 1.02B
\par }{\f9 This is a minor maintenance release that adds the following features:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 *  antialiasing support
\par *  minor user interface revisions
\par *  25 percent improvement in radiosity calculation and rendering speed
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 *  }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  environment and entity file format documentation
\par }{\b\f9 Version 1.02C
\par }{\f9 This is another minor maintenance release. It adds no new features, but it does include }{\i\f9 full C++ source code}{\f9  for }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9 , as well as project make files for Microsoft Visual C++ V1.5 and Borland C++ Version 4.5.
\par Please note that the source code is copyrighted. It may be freely copied, redistributed, and/or modified for personal, non-commercial use ONLY, provided the copyright notice is included with all source code files.
\par }{\b\f9 Version 1.03A
\par }{\f9 This release adds the following features:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 *  interactive environment viewing, including dolly, orbit, pan, rotate, tilt, and zoom
\par *  default view display
\par *  minor user interface revisions
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 *  environment statistics reporting
\par }{\b\f9 Version 1.03B
\par }{\f9 This release adds the following features:
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 *   conversion from Windows 3.1 to Windows 95 / NT
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 *  minor bug fixes
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 The radiosity-related C++ source code included with this release of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  is fully documented in the book }{\b\i\f9 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective}{\f9  (Wiley, 1994). See }{\strike\f9 Read This Book!}{\v\f9 
HELP_BOOK}{\f9  for further details.\page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_LICENSE}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} License}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain 
\nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 Commercial License
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 The }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  Radiosity Renderer\'99 is available for licensing as dynamic link libraries for both Win16 and Win32 platforms. These libraries include numerous features not available in the current release.
\par Please contact:
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 byHeart Consultants Limited
\par 620 Ballantree Road
\par West Vancouver, B.C.
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Canada V7S 1W3
\par Attn:\tab Ian Ashdown, Vice President
\par e-mail:\tab iashdown@ledalite.com
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 for technical specifications and licensing information.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_CREDITS}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Credits}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 Credits
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  was written by:
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 byHeart Consultants Limited
\par 620 Ballantree Road
\par West Vancouver, B.C.
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Canada V7S 1W3
\par Attn:\tab Ian Ashdown, Vice President
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 Web URL:\tab http://www.ledalite.com
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 e-mail:\tab iashdown@ledalite.com
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 The radiosity-related C++ source code included with this release of }{\b\f9 HELIOS}{\f9  is fully documented in the book }{\b\i\f9 Radiosity: A Programmer's Perspective}{\f9  (Wiley, 1994). See }{\strike\f9 Read This Book!}{
\v\f9 HELP_BOOK}{\f9  for further details.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_FILE_MENU}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} File Menu}}{\cs15\fs24\up6 +{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar 
\fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:010}}{\b\f9\fs24 File Menu commands
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\strike\f9 Open}{\v\f9 HELP_OPEN}{\f9 
\par Opens an existing }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9  (*.WLD) file. The current environment file (if any) is automatically closed.
\par }{\b\strike\f9 Save As}{\v\f9 HELP_SAVE_AS}{\f9 
\par Saves the current bitmap image as a Microsoft Paintbrush-compatible BMP graphics file.
\par }{\b\strike\f9 Entities}{\v\f9 HELP_SETDIR}{\f9 
\par Specifies the directory where the }{\f9\ul entity}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9  (*.ENT) files can be found. If no directory is specified, the current directory is assumed.
\par }{\b\f9 Statistics}{\f9 
\par Displays the }{\i\f9 Environment Statistics}{\f9  dialog box that indicates the number of }{\f9\ul instances}{\v\f9 term_instance}{\f9 , surfaces, }{\f9\ul patches}{\v\f9 term_patch}{\f9 , }{\f9\ul elements}{\v\f9 term_element}{\f9 
, and vertices in an environment. This menu item is active only after an environment has been loaded.
\par }{\b\f9 Exit}{\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 Closes the current environment file (if any) and terminates the program.
\par \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_CAMERA_MENU}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Camera Menu}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{
\b\f9\fs24 Camera Menu commands}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\strike\f9 Set Camera}{\v\f9 HELP_SETCAMERA}{\f9 
\par Sets the }{\f9\ul field of view}{\v\f9 term_field_of_view}{\f9  and }{\f9\ul clipping plane}{\v\f9 term_clipping_plane}{\f9  distances of the }{\f9\ul synthetic camera}{\v\f9 term_synthetic_camera}{\f9 .
\par }{\b\strike\f9 Set View}{\v\f9 HELP_SETVIEW}{\f9 
\par Specifies the position and orientation of the synthetic camera in three-dimensional space.
\par }{\b\f9 Default View}{\f9 
\par Initializes the position and orientation of the synthetic camera to its default values.
\par }{\b\f9 Interactive}{\f9 
\par Displays the interactive mode menu for controlling the synthetic camera's position and orientation using the mouse.
\par There are six interactive modes. Only one mode can be activated at a time. The mouse is enabled whenever a mode is active and the left mouse button is depressed. The wireframe or bitmap image is redrawn when the mouse button is released.
\par }\pard \fi-720\li720\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 1.\tab }{\b\f9 Dolly}{\f9  - the camera }{\f9\ul eye position}{\v\f9 term_eye_position}{\f9  and }{\f9\ul focus position}{\v\f9 term_focus_position}{\f9\ul   }{\f9 
are shifted forward or backward along the camera's line of sight (i.e., the }{\f9\ul view direction}{\v\f9 term_view_direction}{\f9 
 vector). Moving the mouse upwards on the screen moves the eye and focus positions forward; moving the mouse downwards moves them backward.
\par 2.\tab }{\b\f9 Orbit}{\f9 
 - the camera eye position is rotated about the focus position, with the camera's line of sight remaining fixed on the focus position. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen moves the eye position in the same direction.
\par 3.\tab }{\b\f9 Pan}{\f9 
 - the camera eye position and focus position are shifted horizontally and vertically perpendicular to the camera's line of sight. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen moves the eye and focus positions in the same direction.
\par 4.\tab }{\b\f9 Rotate}{\f9  - the camera's view dir
ection and focus position are rotated horizontally and vertically about the eye position. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen rotates the view direction vector and moves the focus position in the same direction.
\par 5.\tab }{\b\f9 Tilt}{\f9  - the camera's }{\f9\ul view-up vector}{\v\f9 term_viewup_vector}{\f9 
 (and hence the viewed image) is tilted (rotated) relative to its default vertical orientation. Moving the mouse in a given direction on the screen tilts the view-up vector in the same direction.
\par 6.\tab }{\b\f9 Zoom}{\f9  - the camera's }{\f9\ul view distance}{\v\f9 term_view_distance}{\f9  is decreased or increased, resulting in a larger or smaller }{\f9\ul field of view}{\v\f9 term_field_of_view}{\f9 
. Moving the mouse upwards on the screen decreases the view distance; moving the mouse downwards increases the view distance. (This is equivalent to adjusting the focal length of a zoom lens on a camera.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 The interactive mode menu can also be displayed by clicking the right mouse button.\page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_RENDER_MENU}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Render Menu}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Render Menu commands}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Wireframe}{\f9 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Displays a wireframe view of the }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Shaded}{\f9 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Displays a shaded bitmap image without performing any }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 . Useful for examining the specified surface colors of }{\f9\ul entities}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9 
 in the environment.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Rendering}{\f9 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Performs radiosity calculations for the environment, then displays a true-color bitmap image.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Redisplay}{\f9 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Updates and redisplays the bitmap image without performing any radiosity calculations.}{\v\f9 
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_OPTIONS_MENU}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Options Menu}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Options Menu commands}{\f9\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\strike\f9 Set Display}{\v\f9 HELP_SETDISPLAY}{\f9 
\par Sets the bitmap image display parameters.
\par }{\b\strike\f9 Set Color}{\v\f9 HELP_SETCOLOR}{\f9 
\par Sets the bitmap image color parameters.
\par }{\b\strike\f9 Set Convergence}{\v\f9 HELP_SETCONVERGE}{\f9 
\par Sets the radiosity calculation }{\f9\ul convergence}{\v\f9 term_convergence}{\f9  parameters.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} glossary}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Glossary}}{\b\f9\fs24 Glossary}{\f9\fs24 
\par }{\f9\fs8\ul 
\par }{\f9\ul ambient lighting}{\v\f9 term_ambient_lighting}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul back plane distance}{\v\f9 term_back_plane_distance}{\f9\ul 
\par clipping plane}{\v\f9 term_clipping_plane}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul color quantization}{\v\f9 term_color_quantization}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul convergence}{\v\f9 term_convergence}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul dolly}{\v\f9 term_dolly}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul element, surface}{\v\f9 term_element}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul emittance}{\v\f9 term_emittance}{\f9\ul 
\par entity}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul exitance}{\v\f9 term_exitance}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul eye position}{\v\f9 term_eye_position}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul field of view}{\v\f9 term_field_of_view}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul focus position}{\v\f9 term_focus_position}{\f9\ul  
\par front plane distance}{\v\f9 term_front_plane_distance}{\f9\ul 
\par gamma}{\v\f9 term_gamma}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul jitter}{\v\f9 term_jitter}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul instance}{\v\f9 term_instance}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul luminance}{\v\f9 term_luminance}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul orbit}{\v\f9 term_orbit}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul pan}{\v\f9 term_pan}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul patch}{\v\f9 term_patch}{\f9\ul 
\par positive overshooting}{\v\f9 term_positive_overshooting}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul rotate}{\v\f9 term_rotate}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul step}{\v\f9 term_step}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul stopping criterion}{\v\f9 term_stopping_criterion}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul synthetic camera}{\v\f9 term_synthetic_camera}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul tilt}{\v\f9 term_tilt}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul view direction}{\v\f9 term_view_direction}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul view distance}{\v\f9 term_view_distance}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul view window}{\v\f9 term_view_window}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul view-up vector}{\v\f9 term_viewup_vector}{\f9 
\par }{\f9\ul zoom}{\v\f9 term_zoom}{\f9 
\par \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_OPEN}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Open}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 
Open command (File menu)}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Opens an existing }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9  (*.WLD) file. The current environment file (if any) is automatically closed.
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 File Name
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Select or type the name of the environment file to be opened. This box lists files with the filename extension selected in the List Files of type box.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 List Files of Type
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Selects the type of file for the File Name list. The extension .WLD indicates an environment (or }{\i\f9 world}{\f9 ) file.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Directories}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Selects the directory where the environment file is located.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Drives
\par }{\f9 Selects the drive where the environment file is located.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SAVE_AS}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Save As}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +}
 commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Save As command (File menu)}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Saves the current bitmap image as a Microsoft Paintbrush-compatible BMP or TARGA graphics file.
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 File Name
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Select or type the name of the bitmap image file to be saved. If the file already exists, you will be asked whether you want to overwrite it.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Save File As Type
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Select either BMP or TGA (TARGA) file format. The file will be saved in either 8-bit (256 color) or 24-bit (16.7 million color) format, depending on what color resolution is available or has been chosen. (See the }{
\strike\f9 Set Display}{\v\f9 HELP_SETDISPLAY}{\f9  command for further information.)
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Directories}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Selects the directory where the file is to be saved to.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Drives
\par }{\f9 Selects the drive where the file is to be saved to.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETDIR}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Directories}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 
+} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Entities command (File menu)}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the directory for the }{\f9\ul entity}{\v\f9 term_entity}{\f9  (*.ENT) files.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Dialog Box Options
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Entities File Path
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Enter the full path name of the directory where the entity files specified in the }{\f9\ul environment}{\v\f9 term_environment}{\f9  file can be found.
\par If no directory is specified, the current directory is assumed.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETCAMERA}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Parameters}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Set Camera command (Camera menu)}{\f9 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa240\nowidctlpar {\f9 Defines the }{\f9\ul synthetic camera}{\v\f9 term_synthetic_camera}{\f9  parameters.
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Dialog Box Options
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Camera Distances
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar\tx288 {\f9 Specifies the }{\f9\ul view distance}{\v\f9 term_view_distance}{\f9  to define the }{\f9\ul field of view}{\v\f9 term_field_of_view}{\f9  and the front and back }{\f9\ul clipping plane}{\v\f9 term_clipping_plane}
{\f9  distances.
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 The view distance must be greater than zero.
\par The front and back clipping distances are measured from the }{\f9\ul view window}{\v\f9 term_view_window}{\f9  in the }{\f9\ul view direction}{\v\f9 term_view_direction}{\f9 .
\par The front clipping plane distance must be less than the back clipping plane distance.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Window Scale}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specify the window scaling factor.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Window Dimensions}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specify the horizontal and vertical dimensions of the bitmap in screen pixels.
\par The allowable range is from 32 to 1024 pixels.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Projection}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specify either perspective or parallel projection.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETVIEW}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Specify View}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Set View command (Camera menu)}{\f9\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Set the position and orientation of the }{\f9\ul synthetic camera}{\v\f9 term_synthetic_camera}{\f9  in three-dimensional space.
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Eye Position
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the x-y-z coordinates for the }{\f9\ul eye position}{\v\f9 term_eye_position}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Focus Position
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the x-y-z coordinates for the }{\f9\ul focus position}{\v\f9 term_focus_position}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 View Direction
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the horizontal and vertical angles for the }{\f9\ul view direction vector}{\v\f9 term_view_direction}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 View-Up Vector
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the horizontal and vertical angles for the }{\f9\ul view-up vector}{\v\f9 term_viewup_vector}{\f9 .
\par NOTE: The view direction and view-up vectors cannot be collinear.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 
\par \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETDISPLAY}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Parameters}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{
\b\f9\fs24 Set Display command (Options menu)}{\f9\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the bitmap image display parameters.
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Intensity}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the bitmap image intensity. The default value is 1.0.
\par NOTE: Adjusting the image intensity is equivalent to adding or subtracting }{\f9\ul ambient lighting}{\v\f9 term_ambient_lighting}{\f9  to the environment.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Contrast
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the bitmap image contrast. The default value is 1.0.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Gamma
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Sets the }{\f9\ul gamma}{\v\f9 term_gamma}{\f9  value for the display. The default value of 2.2 is typical for most color monitors.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Color Reduction
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Color reduction is performed by randomly }{\f9\ul jittering}{\v\f9 term_jitter}{\f9  the RGB }{\f9\ul luminance}{\v\f9 term_luminance}{\f9 
 of each 24-bit color pixel. It is useful for alleviating color banding effects visible in 24-bit color images displayed on systems that support 32,768 or 65,536 colors.
\par The Noise Level parameter determines the amount of jittering applies to each pixel. The allowable values are 0 to 8.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Antialiasing
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Antialiasing is performed by supersampling with a Bartlett (i.e., triangular) filter. Increasing the resolution reduces the staircase effect (or \ldblquote jaggies\rdblquote 
) that are otherwise evident in the bitmap image.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETCOLOR}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Parameters}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Set Color command (Options menu)}{\f9\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the bitmap image color parameters.
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Color Display
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the type of color display for the bitmap image. The choices are:
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 RGB Color\tab - true color display (24-bit or 8-bit color).
\par Grayscale\tab - monochrome (8-bit grayscale).
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Pseudocolor\tab - false color display based on pixel }{\f9\ul luminance}{\v\f9 term_luminance}{\f9 .
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Color Resolution
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies number of colors in bitmap image. The choices are:
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\f9 16.7 Million Colors\tab - 24-bit color bitmap
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 256 Colors\tab \tab - 8-bit color bitmap
\par NOTE: The 16.7 Million Colors option is only available on computer systems capable of displaying at least 32,768 colors. On 256-color systems, the bitmap is first calculated as a 24-bit color image, then }{\f9\ul color quantized}{\v\f9 
term_color_quantization}{\f9  to convert it to an 8-bit color bitmap for display.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page }{\cs15\fs16\up6 #{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 #} HELP_SETCONVERGE}${\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {\cs15\fs16\up6 $} Set Convergence}+{\footnote \pard\plain \nowidctlpar \fs20 {
\cs15\fs16\up6 +} commands:020}}{\b\f9\fs24 Set Convergence command (Options menu)}{\f9\fs24 
\par }\pard \qj\nowidctlpar {\f9\fs8 
\par }\pard \sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the }{\f9\ul convergence}{\v\f9 term_convergence}{\f9  parameters for the }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 .
\par }{\b\f9 Dialog Box Options}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Maximum Steps}{\f9 
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the maximum number of steps performed by the radiosity calculations. Each step represents the transfer of light between two surface }{\f9\ul elements}{\v\f9 term_element}{\f9 
. The allowable values are 1 to 2000.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Stopping Criterion
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies the }{\f9\ul stopping criterion}{\v\f9 term_stopping_criterion}{\f9 
 for the radiosity calculations. This value represents the amount of light that has not yet been absorbed by the surfaces, expressed as a fraction of the original amount of light emitted by the light sources. The allowable value are 0.0 to 1.0.
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Ambient Exitance
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies whether the currently remaining unabsorbed light is to be distributed equally throughout the environment as }{\f9\ul ambient lighting}{\v\f9 term_ambient_lighting}{\f9 . Useful for quickly generating bitmap 
images after only a few steps, although the images will not be photometrically accurate. (See also }{\f9\ul exitance}{\v\f9 term_exitance}{\f9 .)
\par }\pard \li288\nowidctlpar {\b\f9 Positive Overshoot
\par }\pard \li288\sa120\nowidctlpar {\f9 Specifies whether the radiosity calculations employ }{\f9\ul positive overshooting}{\v\f9 term_positive_overshooting}{\f9 . The }{\f9\ul radiosity calculations}{\v\f9 term_radiosity_calculations}{\f9 
 will usually converge more quickly (that is, fewer steps will be required) when this option is enabled.
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar {\f9 \page 
\par }}